---
title: Life101
date: 2024-12-12 12:28 +500
categories: [Life]
tags: [life]
pin: true
image: /assets/thumbnails/life.png
---

# Life lessons I have learned throughout my life

- If you enjoy time goes fast, even when it is same 2 hours. But if you are bored or not enjoying time goes slow. --killing time by making yourself "busy" is not fruitful for yourselves--

- The only time you really live fully is from 30-60- The young ones are slaves to dreams, The old ones are servants of regrets -- Only middle ages have all their 5 senses together in keeping of their wits.

- Dont do 10/10 execution on 2/10 opportunity.

- Removing is more important than adding as you grow older.

- It is the mark of an educated mind to be able to entertain a thought without accepting it-- Becoming your own devil's advocate is the most important thing for your own intellectual development.

- Just because we don't have anything important to talk about, doesnt mean the time we spend together isnt meaningful.

- Failure is not the opposite of success, it's part of it.-- A novice tries until they get it right, a master tries until they no longer get it wrong.

- Failing to prepare is preparing to fail.

- Worrying is a lot like a rocking chair, it gives you something to do, but doesn’t get you anywhere.

- Comparison is the thief of joy.

- A day where you don't learn something new, is a day wasted-- If you're not learning, you're fucked.

- If you can't get out of it, get into it

- Your wound is probably not your fault, but healing is your responsibility.

- If you are one to feel self-conscious or have mild social anxiety, it can be helpful to remember that no one is really paying as much attention to you as you think.--Anxiety: everyone’s judging you Me: chill, no one cares Depression: ever

- The grass is greener where you take care of it.

- It is possible to commit no mistakes and still lose. That is not a weakness. That is life.

- You can be the ripest, yummiest, juiciest peach and there will still be people in the world who don’t like peaches.

- If you punish them for telling the truth, you teach them to lie.

- Never throw the first punch, but feel free to throw the rest of them

- Always undersell and overdeliver

- If you worry about not being a good person, remember that bad people don't care if they're a good person or not.

- If you choose not to decide, you still have made a choice.

- It's a lot better to say 'Oh well' instead of 'What if' when it comes to any opportunity in life

- Be a good person, but don't waste time proving it

- Most of getting things done is not about having ideal conditions, inspiration, or even motivation - so stop waiting for all that. Just put glue on your ass and do it.

- A lot of car crashes are caused bc someone tried to save 4 seconds

- Does it need to be said?; Does it need to be said by me?; Does it need to be said by me right now?

- If you are distressed by anything external, the pain is not due to the thing itself but to your estimate of it, and this you have the power to revoke at any moment.

- If you have a problem that can be fixed, there is no use in worrying. If you have a problem that cannot be fixed, there is no use in worrying.

- The world is a comedy to those that think, a tragedy to those that feel.

- We suffer more from imagination than from reality.

- Everyone you meet carries a heavy burden

- Gain responsibility, but never grow up. Grown ups don't have fun.

- Don’t try to change people, try to understand them

- Don’t stress out too much about the things you can’t control

- Do no harm, but take no shit-- Not my circus, not my monkeys.

- Stop trying to make sense of something that will never make sense

- I find that I learn very little when I'm the one talking

- I'm not hard on you because I hate you. I'm hard on you because I know your potential. If I thought you couldn't do any better, I'd tell you to go home.

- If you hang around with shit you’re going to start to smell like shit

- Never argue with stupid people, they will drag you down to their level and then beat you with experience

- Don't tell me how much you make, tell me how much you save.

- Don't set yourself on fire to keep others warm.

- Better to have it and not need it than need it and not have it.

- Efficiency is just clever laziness.

- Halo effect.--Focus on your looks, and evrrything else falls into place. You will be perceived as more confident, competent, funny, etc. Just cause you look good, e.g. if a hot person flirts it's flirting while ugly = harrassment, but it actually affects all other aspects of life not just dating.

- If you don't like the people you're working with, get smarter than they are.

- Don't promise when you are happy, don't reply when you are angry.

- Confidence is a choice

- There is no such thing as right person wrong time. The right people are timeless.

- In work or in life- respond dont react.

- you are not your thoughts, you are the awareness behind them.

- Privacy is power. People can't destroy what they don't know

- Complexity is the enemy of reliability.

- Principles only mean something if you stand up for them when it is incovenient.

- You prepare for war in the time of peace

- Pushing yourself to the point where you have no time for yourself isn’t healthy.
  Having a good work ethic is important, and a strong work ethic is admirable. But there’s a big difference between working hard and living solely to work and the latter isn’t ideal.

- If you don't deal with it now the way you want to, you're going to have to deal with it later in a way you don't.

- You don't need to heal so you can handle trauma, you already know how to do that. You need to heal so you can handle peace.

- Stop accommodating insane behavior of others

- The truth is humanity is corrupt, they cling to power. Money is a form of power. Slavery never ended, just shifted perspective. 

- Burnout exists because we have made rest a reward rather than a right.

- It's never a waste to love somebody 

- Confidence is the dangerously greatest gift you can give to someone
- Consider how hard it is to change yourself, and you will understand how foolish it is to think you can change someone else. 
- Done is better then perfect
